Moving the existing UI code to a separate repository (#14)
fairlearn/fairlearn-proposals: ui/migration.md

   - even if it's part of Fairlearn, it should be a dependency and not live in
     the same repo
3. The dashboard was built with much more complex requirements in mind than
   perhaps required for just the open source package. This is due to its use
   within Azure Machine Learning Studio.
4. The Python code has been much more open to contributions than the
   Typescript code. The Typescript code lacks documentation and contributor
   guide.
5. Several people mentioned the need to have context-specific visualizations
   as opposed to a fixed dashboard. From a project/website perspective this
   would allow us to think of appropriate visualizations per example notebook
   as opposed to providing a general purpose dashboard with the package.

## Proposal

To address the concerns outlined above we propose to

1. Remove the `visualization` code from Fairlearn.
2. Remove the `fairlearn.widget` module from the `fairlearn` package.
3. Move these pieces into a public repository under the `microsoft`
   organization on GitHub (with MIT license as before).
   This is to better signal that the package needs to abide by somewhat
   stricter Microsoft cloud integration requirements.

> 4. Publish a package (Name TBD) from the repo in the `microsoft` organization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Publish a python package (Name TBD) from the repo in the `microsoft` organization
```
I think? Just to be sure it's not an `npm` package or something, I guess.

Reviewer 2: Capitalization "Python". Also--I think that in practice there will be both an npm and Python package published, but what's relevant here is that a Python package will be published and it can be installed & imported separately.

   that can be installed separately if desired.

> 

Reviewer 3: If MS folks on the Azure side aren't able to collaborate or contribute in the open, and decide to create a separate **microsoft/azure-fairlearn** repo that does not have an open development or governance process, that seems like a missed opportunity to collaborate, but it's already the status quo so it seems fine to me to formalize that :)

One specific suggestion is to update this proposal so that it specifies how new development starts within  **fairlearn/fairlearn**.  This could build on the values expressed in [Contributing example notebooks](https://fairlearn.github.io/contributor_guide/contributing_example_notebooks.html), the draft [Mission & Roadmap](https://github.com/fairlearn/fairlearn/pull/500), and ideas expressed in [Brainstorming: Website for "fairness as a sociotechnical challenge" community](https://github.com/fairlearn/fairlearn/issues/498) and the [Fairlearn: Theory of change](https://hackmd.io/EBh01XPtRZGHEg76oD1rGw) hackpad.  I'd be happy to try contributing to this work within **fairlearn/fairlearn**!

If folks are interested in collaborating on that, some tangible first steps would be:
1. Update the [quick start example](https://fairlearn.github.io/quickstart.html) so that it demonstrates how to meet the same user needs without using any Azure bits (eg, with calls to matplotlib as @koaning suggests here and @adrinjalali suggested on the call).  Add a link to **microsoft/azure-fairlearn**.
2. Ask Azure staff to move any issues in **fairlearn/fairlearn** that are specifically related to **microsoft/azure-fairlearn** into that repo.
3. Revise the **fairlearn/fairlearn** roadmap to be [centered on user needs and project values](https://github.com/fairlearn/fairlearn/pull/500#discussion_r443040820), and update that prioritization given the level of MS staffing and commitment from open source volunteers.  In that conversation, I'd vote to prioritize fixing immediate issues for new users (eg, examples don't work because published packages lag the website; core assessment features work the first time across all notebook platforms; usage guides aimed at first-time users), new work that starts by expressing how it's aligned with practitioner needs (eg, [Holstein et al. 2019](http://www.jennwv.com/papers/fairness-in-practice.pdf); [Madaio et al. 2020](http://www.jennwv.com/papers/checklists.pdf)), and new work on tools that support engaging with fairness as a sociotechnical challenge (eg, [Selbst et al. 2019](https://andrewselbst.files.wordpress.com/2019/10/selbst-et-al-fairness-and-abstraction-in-sociotechnical-systems.pdf); [candidate screening example notebook](https://hackmd.io/GMli82s7SxORABkabCgw8Q), updating  the website to include [sociotechnical talking points](https://hackmd.io/nDiDafJ6TMKi2cYDHnujtA)).

I'd love to see work that meets practitioner needs, and work that approaches fairness as a sociotechnical challenge as a core part of **fairlearn/fairlearn**.  Thanks for listening! 👍

Author: As you're writing this was the status quo as it is, so this isn't a step backwards but rather a formal manifestation of what was happening already. Contributions have never really been possible, but the steps outlined in the proposal will change that by
- specifying how/where to contribute
- specifying the development process
- explaining exactly what restrictions there are (related to localization, accessibility, styling)

That should in fact make it much easier to contribute. As mentioned earlier this is still open on GitHub with MIT license. From what I understand about typescript so far it's possible to create different kinds of wizards from there, e.g. one that AzureML uses and another one that we build based on a candidate screening scenario, and another one that we build based on a lending scenario, etc. Depending on their purpose they can use different views that can live alongside each other in the repo and perhaps also some shared ones.

If people feel like it's easier to do this outside of the Microsoft repo that's perfectly fine, too! As you can read in the updated proposal there are pretty much three ways of setting this up, and whatever works for people can be done. This isn't mutually exclusive with the original proposal, it's rather beyond the original proposal's scope (and that's why that scope is now extended).

The point you made (and @koaning in a different comment) about quickstart, notebooks, and user guides makes sense. I've explicitly added that to the proposed steps.

Regarding your proposed steps: these are all existing items that everyone is more than welcome to join in, and some of them are actively in progress (e.g. @riedgar-ms is versioning the documentation to avoid the difference in the webpage to the last published package version).

The entire point of this proposal is to allow everyone to move beyond restricting development so that UI development can actually happen. If that sounds like an interesting part of Fairlearn to contribute to (in the context of the examples we discuss on Thursdays or otherwise) we'd love to work with you, whether it's in the Microsoft repo or a repo under the Fairlearn org.

2. Remove the `fairlearn.widget` module from the `fairlearn` package.
3. Remove existing Fairlearn dashboard from Fairlearn website, unless any
   example notebooks require it. See *endorsements* at the end of the
   proposal for a more general view on UIs and notebooks.
4. Move these pieces into a public open source repository under the
   `microsoft` organization on GitHub (with MIT license as before).
   This is to better signal that the package needs to abide by somewhat
   stricter Microsoft cloud integration requirements.
   That said, contributions would still be welcomed and Roman will add
   clear guidance on how to contribute as well as any additional requirements.
5. Publish a Python package (Name TBD) from the repo in the `microsoft`
   organization that can be installed separately if desired.

In general, this opens up Fairlearn to be the base library that defines
metrics around which anyone can build any type of UI that they find useful.
This supports the idea that fairness is context-specific and allows people
to build the kind of UI that makes sense in their application context.

In the developer call (8/13) this lead to confusion in large part because the

> original proposal addresses a smaller concern ("where does this particular

Reviewer: reference to the original proposal is not useful since people who read the proposal later won't have the context to know what it was.
Instead we could simply address those concerns in the "new" proposal.

Author: ... which is what that section attempts to do by explaining the differences in scope and what could be done about it in terms of repo setup.

code live?") as opposed to the big picture ("what role does UI have in
Fairlearn and how can the community build UI together?").
This could manifest itself in different ways.
To decide on a suitable path forward there are different options with their
own pros and cons as outlined below.
Please do provide feedback so that we can find a model that works for
everyone so that we can move towards the common goal of building a user

> experience according to user needs.

Reviewer: This paragraph seems to be more suitable for a mailing list discussion or a thread on the PR rather than the proposal itself.

Author: Need to indicate that there are options somehow. Once it's clear what's preferred this will be adjusted

In the charts below the left side is the Fairlearn repository as we have it

> today with Python modules, website, and notebooks. The only change is that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
before this proposal takes effect with Python modules, website, and notebooks. The only change is that the
```

a repo under the `microsoft` GitHub organization. Separate from these parts
the bottom right of the charts can be structured in different ways:

1. **Shared repo within the Fairlearn organization**
   ![Fairlearn setup with a dedicated place/repo(s) for UI development](fairlearn-ui-repo.PNG)

   - With such a repo it's obvious where the community can work together.
     The community may choose to work off of the existing dashboard code
     and extend that (or not).
     The separation from the Azure codebase means that criteria to complete
     PRs are less strict.
     As a consequence, there could be a lot more experimentation than in the
     `microsoft` repo.
   - This requires involvement (time) from the community to handle
     - PRs
     - issues
     - releases
     - communication / coordination

2. **Repos within the Fairlearn organization**
   This is just like 1. except that each UI effort gets its own repo and the
   people behind the effort can have admin privileges.
   If different people work on different dashboards for different application
   contexts a separation of UI repos may be required at some point.

> 3. **Repos outside the Fairlearn organization**

Reviewer: I don't think the distinction between 2 and 3 is clear here.

Author: One is within the Fairlearn org (2) the other one is outside (3). It's basically about whether the project provides space for this or whether people prefer to operate outside its boundaries.
